=== PAGE 1 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED SEPTEMBER, 2026 1
From Policy Actions to Whole-Body Dynamics: A Unified
Projection-Based Framework for Versatile Legged Loco-Manipulation
Chengzhen Yan1, Qingchen Liu1, Jiahu Qin1, Yiming Jiang1, and Yang Shi2
Abstract—Learning-based locomotion policies are widely
adopted for legged robots but face integration challenges with
model-based whole-body optimization for loco-manipulation, as
they output joint-space commands instead of dynamics-level
variables that enable explicit enforcement of rigid-body dynamics
and contact objectives. To resolve this, we introduce Policy Action
Dynamics Projection (PADP), an optimization-based dynamics
projection that maps joint-space policy outputs into contact-
consistent whole-body variables (i.e., generalized accelerations,
contact wrenches, and joint torques) while satisfying rigid-body
dynamics and contact conditions. Building on this dynamics-
level interface, we further develop a unified loco-manipulation
controller that directly leverages a generic pretrained locomotion
policy and integrates model-based manipulation tasks in a sub-
sequent unified whole-body QP. This formulation enables precise
and coordinated whole-body loco-manipulation performance that
goes far beyond the policy’s original command space without re-
training. Simulation and hardware experiments on both point-foot
and wheeled-foot quadruped manipulators demonstrate stable Fig. 1. Selected demonstrations of the LYNX M20 across locomotion and
dynamic loco-manipulation with improved agility and precision loco-manipulation tasks in different environments.
over conventional whole-body control baselines.
space makes it difficult to directly specify and realize task-
Index Terms—Legged robots, whole-body optimization, mobile space manipulation objectives under changing interactions,
manipulation. such as contact force and wrench regulation. As a result,
end-to-end policies offer limited post-deployment adaptability,
I. INTRODUCTION
since modifying objectives, constraints, or interaction priorities
L
EGGED robots are increasingly expected to go beyond
often requires retraining or extensive fine-tuning, and they
mobility and execute loco-manipulation tasks [1], as il-
typically require learning locomotion and manipulation jointly
lustrated in Fig. 1, since they enable contact-rich manipulation
from scratch.
while maintaining agile traversability over diverse terrains [2],
Another strategy is to decouple loco-manipulation into sepa-
[3].
rate modules, since locomotion remains challenging for purely
A direct approach is to train an end-to-end learning-based
model-based optimization. A common design is therefore to
policy for loco-manipulation [4]–[6]. Such policies can achieve
combine a learned locomotion prior with a separate manipu-
impressive coordination and even demonstrate unified position
lation module, e.g., by stacking a manipulation policy on top
and force control with compliant interaction behaviors [7],
of a learned locomotion policy [9], [10] or learning residual
[8]. However, manipulation tasks require accurate end-effector
terms for a model-based whole-body controller [11], [12].
tracking, compliant interaction, and wrench regulation while
These approaches improve reuse and data efficiency, but the
respecting torque limits and contact feasibility, which are more
coordination is often mediated through joint- or task-level
naturally expressed through explicit whole-body objectives and
interfaces (e.g., tracking footholds or residual terms). This
constraints. For such end-to-end policies, the joint-space action
becomes a bottleneck when manipulation demands coordinated
base motion adjustments, such as reaching upward while
Manuscript received: March 15, 2026; Revised: June 18, 2026; Accepted:
September 2, 2026. maintaining dynamic feasibility. In addition, these interfaces
This paper was recommended for publication by Editor Olivier Stasse upon
are often tied to task-specific policy designs, which limits
evaluation of the Associate Editor and Reviewers’ comments. This work
compatibility with off-the-shelf locomotion policies.
was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62425309 and in part by the Fundamental and Interdisciplinary
These limitations point to a missing dynamics-level interface
Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China under
Grant JYB2025XDXM109. (Corresponding author: Jiahu Qin). between learned locomotion policies and model-based whole-
1Chengzhen Yan, Qingchen Liu, Jiahu Qin, and Yiming Jiang are with body optimization: locomotion policies typically output joint-
the Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of
space commands, whereas model-based whole-body control
China, Hefei 230027, China (e-mail: yanchengzhen@ustc.edu.cn;
qingchen_liu@ustc.edu.cn; jhqin@ustc.edu.cn; is formulated over dynamics-level variables such as gener-
jiangyiming@mail.ustc.edu.cn).
alized accelerations, contact wrenches, and joint torques. To
2Yang Shi is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University
address this, we introduce Policy Action Dynamics Projection
of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3P6, Canada (e-mail: yshi@uvic.ca).
Digital Object Identifier (DOI): see top of this page. (PADP), a constrained projection that maps generic joint-space
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 2 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
2 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED SEPTEMBER, 2026
policy outputs to contact-consistent whole-body variables by TABLE I
enforcing rigid-body dynamics and contact conditions. Related COMPARISON WITH OTHER LOCO-MANIPULATION METHODS
locomotion works have explored constrained dynamics inter-
Controller ID MPC Unified RoboDuet MLM PADP
pretations of learned policy actions [13], [14], while Acc-
Capability [16] Policy [7] [9] [4] [Ours]
CBF-QP [15] uses an acceleration-level CBF-QP to filter End-effector Position (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
RL commands for runtime safety without policy retraining. End-effector Orientation (cid:88) × (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
However, these methods focus on locomotion-oriented adap- End-effector Force (cid:88) (cid:88) × × (cid:88)
tation or safety filtering and are not designed to provide
Compliance Behavior (cid:88) (cid:88) × × (cid:88)
a dynamics-level interface for unified loco-manipulation. In
Uneven-Terrain Locomotion limited (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
this work, we leverage PADP as a dynamics-level control
interface in a unified loco-manipulation framework, which q¨ ∈ Rn v to denote generalized accelerations. The full-body
equation of motion with external contact wrenches is given
reuses a generic pretrained locomotion policy as a locomotion
by:
prior and integrates model-based manipulation in a subsequent
unified whole-body QP. This enables coordinated whole-body M(q)q¨ + h(q,q˙) = S(cid:62)τ + J (q)(cid:62)F , (1)
c c
loco-manipulation and extends locomotion capability beyond where M(q) ∈ Rn v ×n v is the generalized inertia matrix,
the policy’s original command space without retraining. The h(q,q˙) collects Coriolis, centrifugal, and gravity terms, and
comparison with existing loco-manipulation methods is sum- τ ∈ Rn j is the vector of actuated joint torques. The selection
marized in Table I. matrix is S = [0 I ] ∈ Rn j ×n v, which selects the
n ×6 n
j j
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows: actuated joint subspace and leaves the floating base unactu-
We develop a PADP-based loco-manipulation frame- ated. The stacked contact Jacobian J (q) ∈ Rn c ×n v maps
• c
work that reuses a generic pretrained locomotion policy generalized velocities to Cartesian or spatial contact velocities.
and integrates position, force, and hybrid force-motion The contact wrench is F = [f(cid:62),...,f(cid:62),w(cid:62) ](cid:62) ∈ Rn c with
c 1 n m
(cid:96)
objectives in a unified whole-body QP built on the n = 3n +6, where f ∈ R3 denotes the support contact force
c (cid:96) i
projected locomotion prior. Policy Action Dynamics acting on the robot at the i-th foot, and w ∈ R6 denotes the
m
Projection (PADP) serves as a dynamics-level inter- interaction wrench applied to the robot at the end-effector by
face that maps joint-space policy actions into contact- the environment or manipulated object.
consistent whole-body variables. This enables seamless
coupling between learning-based locomotion and model-
B. Problem Formulation: Reactive Whole-Body Optimization
based whole-body optimization, supports coordinated
At each control step, we solve a reactive whole-body opti-
loco-manipulation beyond the original policy command
mization over the dynamics variables x := (q¨,F ,τ) subject
space, and requires no policy retraining. c
to the dynamics-consistency constraints in (1) and physical-
We validate the proposed approach in simulation and
•
feasibility constraints (see Section III). We use g(x,q,q˙) = 0
hardware experiments on quadruped manipulators with
to denote the equality constraints that enforce dynamics con-
point-foot and wheeled-foot platforms, demonstrating
sistency, including the equation of motion and contact-related
stable loco-manipulation across contact-rich interaction,
consistency conditions, and use x ∈ X(q,q˙) to denote the
task-oriented operation, compliant human interaction, and
corresponding physical feasibility set.
uneven-terrain scenarios, together with improved agility
The resulting reactive whole-body optimization is:
and precision over conventional baselines.
min (cid:96)(x) (2)
x
II. SYSTEM MODELING AND PROBLEM FORMULATION s.t. g(x,q,q˙) = 0, (3)
In this section, we formulate loco-manipulation as a reac- x ∈ X(q,q˙), (4)
tive whole-body optimization problem. We first introduce the where (cid:96)(x) captures loco-manipulation objectives and regular-
full-body equations of motion and define the dynamics-level ization (see Section III-B).
decision variables x = (q¨,F c ,τ). These variables provide a This formulation provides a common dynamics-level rep-
common representation for the PADP locomotion prior and the resentation for imposing tasks and physical constraints in
model-based manipulation objectives introduced later. reactive loco-manipulation. Reinforcement learning (RL) lo-
comotion policies typically output joint-space actions rather
than the dynamics-level variables x = (q¨,F ,τ) as in model-
A. Full-body Dynamics for Loco-Manipulation c
based whole-body optimization. This motivates a dynamics-
We consider a floating-base manipulator with n legs and
(cid:96) level interface that maps policy actions to feasible whole-body
an arm, applicable to point-foot and wheeled-foot robots.
variables, as introduced next in Section III-A.
The generalized coordinates are q = [p(cid:62), q(cid:62), q(cid:62) ](cid:62),
b b j
where p ∈ R3 is the base position, q ∈ S3 is the base
b b
orientation represented by a unit quaternion, and q ∈ Rn j
III. PADP LOCO-MANIPULATION FRAMEWORK
j
collects leg and manipulator joints. The generalized velocity Fig. 2 provides an overview of the proposed framework.
is q˙ = [v(cid:62), ω(cid:62), q˙(cid:62) ](cid:62) ∈ Rn v with n = 6 + n , where At each control step, a pretrained locomotion policy generates
b b j v j
v ,ω ∈ R3 are the base linear and angular velocities. We use joint-space actions executed as a PD torque primitive, which is
b b
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 3 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
YAN et al.: FROM POLICY ACTIONS TO WHOLE-BODY DYNAMICS 3
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed PADP loco-manipulation framework. A user command specifies the end-effector task for manipulation, while a pretrained
locomotion policy is driven by a command override generated from the optimized base motion to promote coordinated whole-body behavior. The locomotion
policy maps the observation o to a joint-space action a, which is projected by PADP into a contact-consistent locomotion prior xPADP. The unified whole-
body QP combines the PADP prior with locomotion and manipulation objectives under rigid-body dynamics and contact constraints, producing joint torque
commands τ. Proprioceptive state estimation provides (q,q˙) and the contact mode to the optimizer, and the observation input to the policy.
wheel joints are specified through q˙des while the associated
loco
K entries are set to zero.
p,loco
The policy action is then converted into a torque primitive
using PD laws in joint-space:
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
τπ = K qdes − S q + K q˙des − S q˙ .
loco p,loco loco loco j d,loco loco loco j
(6)
A selection matrix S ∈ Rn j,loco ×n j is used to extract
loco
locomotion-related joints (i.e., leg joints) from the full actuated
joints, leaving the torques for the manipulator unspecified. This
torque primitive captures the effective closed-loop behavior
implied by the learned action.
Fig. 3. Illustration of Policy Action Dynamics Projection (PADP) interface. 2) Dynamics Projection to Whole-Body Variables: The
A learning-based locomotion policy is executed in joint space as a PD torque torque primitive τπ is defined in joint space, while the
primitive τπ (left). PADP then projects this joint-space action into contact- loco
loco whole-body optimization in Section II-B is posed over the
consistent whole-body variables x = (q¨,F ,τ) (right) by enforcing rigid-
c
body dynamics in (1) and contact kinematics in (7), producing a dynamics- dynamics-level variables x = (q¨,F ,τ). PADP bridges this
c
level locomotion prior for the subsequent whole-body optimization.
gap by solving a constrained dynamics projection, where the
projected by PADP into a contact-consistent locomotion prior contact consistency is enforced through contact constraints.
xPADP. The PADP prior is then combined with model-based lo- For each active support contact c ∈ C , the contact-consistent
i s
comotion and manipulation objectives under shared dynamics acceleration of the contact point r satisfies:
c
i
and contact constraints to generate whole-body commands for ¨r = J (q)q¨ + J ˙ (q,q˙)q˙ = a , ∀c ∈ C , (7)
c c c c i s
i i i i
loco-manipulation. This design preserves the robustness of the
where a = 0 for point-foot stance contacts and a =
c c
learned mobility while enabling coordinated whole-body loco- i i
a (q,q˙) for wheeled-foot rolling contacts given in [17].
roll,c
manipulation, including base height and posture adjustments, i
without policy retraining. The constrained dynamics projection is then written as:
xPADP := arg min (cid:13) (cid:13)S τ − τπ (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 (8)
loco loco
q¨,F ,τ
c
A. Policy Action Dynamics Projection (PADP) Interface s.t. (1), (7), (F ,τ) ∈ U. (9)
c
In practice, we use a small regularization term to improve
Locomotion policies are typically executed via joint-space
numerical conditioning. Here, “projection” refers to the con-
references and low-level PD control. PADP builds a dynamics-
strained optimization that selects a dynamics- and contact-
level interface for such policies by projecting their joint-space
consistent realization of the policy-implied torque primitive,
actions into contact-consistent whole-body variables, as shown
rather than dimensionality reduction.
in Fig. 3.
1) Locomotion Policy Action: Let π denote a pretrained
θ The projected solution xPADP provides one contact-
locomotion policy that maps the current observation o to a
t consistent dynamics-level realization of the policy-implied
joint-space action:
torque primitive, which is used as a locomotion prior for
(cid:0) (cid:1)
al t oco = π θ (o t ) := qd lo e c s o , q˙d lo e c s o , K p,loco , K d,loco , (5) the subsequent whole-body optimization. Manipulation often
where qdes ,q˙des ∈ Rn j,loco are desired position and velocity requires additional whole-body adjustments, especially in base
loco loco
references for locomotion-related joints. The diagonal PD gain height and posture. These requirements are incorporated to-
matrices K ,K ∈ Rn j,loco ×n j,loco follow the policy gether with the PADP prior in the unified whole-body opti-
p,loco d,loco
execution setup used during training. For wheeled-foot robots, mization introduced next.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 4 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
4 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED SEPTEMBER, 2026
B. Unified Whole-Body QP for Loco-Manipulation couples the arm motion with the floating-base motion. This
Given the PADP locomotion prior xPADP, we solve the coupling allows the optimizer to coordinate manipulation with
contact-consistent whole-body dynamics, rather than treating
unified whole-body QP over x = (q¨,F ,τ), where the
c
the arm as an isolated subsystem.
PADP projection acts as a locomotion reference and model-
In practice, the weighting matrix W can be tuned to realize
based objectives are introduced for manipulation and whole- ee
different tracking behaviors (e.g., position-only tracking by
body coordination. This design preserves the robustness of the
setting orientation-related weights to zero).
pretrained locomotion policy while allowing the optimizer to
generate base and leg adjustments required by manipulation. Arm Posture Regularization and Damping: We regularize
1) Locomotion Objectives the arm with a nominal posture objective to suppress unnec-
Locomotion in the unified QP is regulated by softly tracking essary motion and reduce the risk of kinematic singularities
the PADP prior, together with light base-motion regularization and self-collision during end-effector tracking. The desired arm
and support-force shaping terms. This keeps the locomotion acceleration is generated by joint-space PD feedback toward
behavior anchored to the pretrained policy, while still allowing the nominal arm posture:
the optimizer to adapt the whole-body motion for manipu- q¨des = K (qnom − q ) − K q˙ ,
arm p,arm arm arm d,arm arm
lation. The optimized base acceleration is integrated into a
where K and K are diagonal posture and damping
p,arm d,arm
velocity command for the locomotion policy. In this manner,
gain matrices. The arm posture regularization is written as
the policy command is generated adaptively by the QP rather (cid:13) (cid:13)2
(cid:96) (x) = (cid:13)S q¨ − q¨des (cid:13) . (14)
than being specified manually. arm arm arm W
arm
Here S selects the arm joint components from q¨. Thus,
PADP Locomotion Prior: The projected locomotion- arm
this term tracks an acceleration reference that contains the
related dynamics xPADP = (q¨PADP,FPADP,τPADP) is used as
c posture error and velocity damping, rather than merely limiting
a soft reference for the locomotion subspace.
the arm acceleration. It discourages excessive arm motion and
We use the following locomotion objectives:
encourages the optimizer to use base and leg motion to assist
(cid:13) (cid:13)2
(cid:96) (x) = (cid:13)P x − P xPADP (cid:13) , (10)
prior loco loco end-effector tracking. As a result, the base can adapt its posture
W
prior
where the selection matrix P extracts the locomotion- and translate to “follow” the end-effector reference, enabling
loco
related terms of x and excludes manipulation-related terms. longer-range tracking beyond the arm workspace.
Base Motion Regularization: We specify a nominal base
End-effector Contact Constraint: For end-effector in-
posture (pdes,qdes) for base-motion regularization, which en-
b b teraction tasks, we constrain only the motion component
codes a level attitude and a nominal body height. A desired
associated with the desired interaction wrench [18]. Let the
base acceleration q¨d b es ∈ R6 is generated with a PD law on the desired wrench be w m ref = [f m ref(cid:62), µr m ef(cid:62) ](cid:62), and let ˆ f m and
base pose error, with damping on the base twist.
µˆ denote its normalized force and torque directions. Writing
m
The task is expressed as a soft term in the QP:
the end-effector Jacobian as J = [J(cid:62), J(cid:62) ](cid:62), we impose a
(cid:13) (cid:13)2 m f µ
(cid:96) (x) = (cid:13)P q¨ − q¨des (cid:13) , (11) directional motion constraint
base b b W base (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
where P selects the floating-base components in q¨. This term ˆ f(cid:62) J q¨ + J ˙ q˙ = 0, µˆ (cid:62) J q¨ + J ˙ q˙ = 0, (15)
b m f f m µ µ
improves stability and allows additional locomotion objectives
along the active reference directions, while suppressing the
such as body height and attitude control for coordinated whole-
orthogonal wrench components:
body motion. (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
I − ˆ f ˆ f(cid:62) f = 0, I − µˆ µˆ (cid:62) µ = 0. (16)
Contact Force Regularization: We also penalize excessive m m m m m m
If a reference force or torque component is set to zero
forces for the leg contacts, which is formulated as
(cid:13) (cid:13)2 (including free-space motion), no directional motion constraint
(cid:96) (x) = (cid:13)P F (cid:13) , (12)
force (cid:96) c
W force is imposed for that component, and the corresponding end-
where P selects the leg-contact components in F .
(cid:96) c effector wrench component is constrained to zero. This ap-
2) Manipulation Objectives
proach enables hybrid force-motion control without imposing
We formulate manipulation as a set of explicit objectives
a full rigid-contact condition at the end-effector.
defined on the unified whole-body variables, so that end-
End-effector Wrench Tracking: For end-effector interac-
effector tracking and contact interaction are optimized jointly
tion tasks, the desired end-effector wrench wref that acts on
with base and leg motions. The objectives include end-effector m
the end-effector is tracked by the following objective:
motion tracking, arm posture regularization for robustness and
(cid:13) (cid:13)2
whole-body coordination, and optional wrench tracking during (cid:96) wrench (x) = (cid:13)P m F c − w m ref (cid:13) W , (17)
wrench
end-effector interaction. where P selects the end-effector wrench components from
m
End-effector Motion Tracking: Let J (q) ∈ R6×n v F c . This term is disabled during free-space motion.
m
denote the end-effector spatial Jacobian. We define a desired 3) Unified Whole-Body QP
spatial acceleration ades ∈ R6 using PD feedback on pose and
m A possible alternative is to retain the raw policy torque-
twist errors:
tracking objective directly in the final whole-body QP. In such
(cid:96) ee (x) = (cid:13) (cid:13)J m (q)q¨ + J ˙ m (q,q˙)q˙ − ad m es (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 W . (13) a single-stage formulation, the generalized accelerations and
ee
Although the objective is specified at the end-effector, it contact wrenches are selected jointly with the manipulation
is enforced over the generalized acceleration q¨ and therefore objectives. In contrast, the proposed two-stage formulation first
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 5 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
YAN et al.: FROM POLICY ACTIONS TO WHOLE-BODY DYNAMICS 5
obtains an explicit contact-consistent dynamics-level realiza-
tion xPADP of the policy-implied torque primitive and then
uses it as a soft locomotion prior for task coordination. This
formulation provides a modular and interpretable separation
between locomotion-prior construction and whole-body task
Fig. 4. Snapshots of the quadruped reaching end-effector targets in different
coordination.
regions of the workspace.
With this prior, we stack the locomotion and manipulation
objectives into the following weighted QP:
(cid:88)
min α (cid:96) (x) (18)
k k
x
k∈K
s.t. (1), (7), (15), (16), (F ,τ) ∈ U, (19)
c
where K collects all task terms and α are scalar weights
k
used to adjust task priorities. Each task cost is written as
(cid:96) (x) = (cid:107)e (x)(cid:107)2 , where W is a diagonal weighting
k k W k
k
matrix. In our experiments, all W matrices are fixed across Fig. 5. Workspace reachability with the corresponding sampled workspace
k
radius r . For each radius, end-effector targets are randomly sampled within
ws
tasks, and all scalar weights are fixed except α , which is
ee a spherical region centered at the base frame with constrained height, and the
increased from 1.0 to 2.0 only for uneven-terrain end-effector success rate is computed over all trials for each method.
following. The wrench-tracking term is omitted from K when
PD terms are clipped in the implementation to avoid overly
no contact-force task is active. The main tuning parameter
aggressive acceleration commands.
is α , which balances the projected locomotion prior and
prior
whole-body adaptation. This two-stage design avoids directly
V. RESULTS
tuning the raw policy torque cost against each manipulation
objective, and the other weights do not require fine-tuning in We evaluate our method both in simulation and in hardware
our experiments. The feasible set U includes a linearized fric- experiments on point-foot and wheeled-foot platforms. Both
tion pyramid, bounds on contact wrenches and joint torques, platforms are equipped with a 6-DOF Unitree Z1 manipulator
and a zero-wrench constraint for inactive contacts. (4.5 kg).
The solution yields contact-consistent whole-body acceler-
ations, contact wrenches, and joint torques that coordinate
A. Simulation Experiments
locomotion and manipulation. The optimized joint torques are
Simulation experiments are conducted on a Unitree Go2
sent to the robot motors at each execution step.
quadruped (point-foot, 15 kg) in MuJoCo, with a simulation
time step of 2 ms, on an Intel i9-11900K CPU. Unless
IV. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
otherwise stated, the robot traverses the simulated uneven
State Estimation: The proposed PADP controller runs terrain shown in Fig. 7. For the continuous tracking task, both
using only proprioceptive sensors. The active contact set C is flat and uneven terrain conditions are evaluated.
s
obtained from foot force sensors when available, or otherwise 1) Baselines
estimated using the momentum-based contact observer in [19]. We compare against the following baselines: RL + Arm-
State estimation follows a Kalman-filter-based pipeline similar QP: The legs are controlled by the pretrained locomotion
to [20]. For point-foot stance contacts, we assume zero contact- policy, while the arm is controlled as an isolated subsystem
point velocity, while for wheeled-foot contacts, the expected using the same manipulation QP objectives. PADP + Arm-
nonzero contact-point velocity is specified by the rolling kine- QP: PADP is used to compute a contact-consistent locomotion
matics. solution, which is then executed directly, while the arm is
Locomotion Policy Training: The locomotion policy is still controlled by the isolated Arm-QP without unified loco-
trained in Isaac Gym following [21], with minor modifications manipulation coupling. PADP Loco-Manipulation Controller
for the wheeled-foot platform, and its actions are directly exe- (Ours): The proposed unified whole-body QP incorporates the
cuted by a standard joint-space PD controller during training. PADP locomotion prior and optimizes manipulation objectives
The policy is trained independently from PADP and the unified
TABLE II
whole-body QP, kept fixed after training, and only projected
END-EFFECTOR TRACKING PERFORMANCE (RMSE ± STD).
by PADP at runtime as a dynamics-level locomotion prior.
Metric Ours Whole-Body MPC Whole-Body RL
Runtime and Software Setup: At runtime, the locomo-
tion policy is updated asynchronously at 50 Hz, and the Flat terrain
Velocity (m/s) 0.067±0.060 0.037±0.039 0.069±0.052
most recent policy output is held constant between updates.
Position (m) 0.008±0.008 0.006±0.006 0.019±0.009
State estimation, PADP, and the unified whole-body QP run
Orientation (rad) 0.082±0.054 0.097±0.062 0.158±0.129
at 500 Hz. Robot dynamics and kinematics are computed
Uneven terrain
using the Pinocchio C++ library [22], and the QP is solved
Velocity (m/s) 0.122±0.184 0.278±0.578 0.259±0.368
with qpOASES [23]. Policy inference is implemented using a Position (m) 0.011±0.013 0.048±0.082 0.034±0.048
Orientation (rad) 0.162±0.280 0.443±0.759 0.302±0.475
LibTorch JIT model. In addition, large errors in the task-space
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 6 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
6 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED SEPTEMBER, 2026
Fig. 6. End-effector tracking during continuous loco-manipulation on sim- Fig. 8. Disturbance response during end-effector velocity tracking at 0.3 m/s
ulated uneven terrain. Top: the end-effector z position closely follows the along x. A lateral force is applied for 0.4 s to the base (70 N) or the end-
sinusoidal reference in the xz plane, while the base height is adjusted effector (50 N). Top: lateral positions of the base and end-effector. Bottom:
adaptively by the controller to coordinate loco-manipulation. Bottom: the base lateral base/end-effector velocities and the end-effector velocity along the
forward velocity fluctuates during locomotion, while the end-effector forward tracking direction.
velocity remains comparatively smooth.
TABLE III
AVERAGE CONTROLLER COMPUTATION TIME (MEAN ± STD, IN MS)
Policy Model Eval. Update
Method
Inference (ms) Optimization (ms) Rate
Ours 0.41±0.08 0.85±0.25 500 Hz
Whole-Body MPC – 18.52±3.81 80 Hz
Whole-Body RL 0.63±0.15 – 50 Hz
arm-only manipulation cannot drive coordinated whole-body
reconfiguration toward targets outside the local arm workspace.
Fig. 7. Simulation snapshots of end-effector tracking on the Unitree Go2 Whole-Body RL remains competitive for nearby targets but
in MuJoCo. The robot traverses the simulated uneven terrain while tracking
drops as whole-body repositioning becomes more important,
a sinusoidal end-effector trajectory in the xz plane. Note that the reused
while Whole-Body MPC often loses balance on the simulated
locomotion policy alone does not support base-height adjustment. Instead,
the base height is coordinated by the proposed unified loco-manipulation uneven terrain when large body motion is required.
controller.
3) End-effector Tracking Accuracy
simultaneously under the same full-body dynamics. Whole-
The tracking performance for the continuous end-effector
Body MPC: A whole-body inverse-dynamics MPC controller
tracking task is summarized in Table II. The robot starts from
following [16]. Whole-Body RL: An end-to-end RL loco-
its nominal configuration and tracks a desired end-effector
manipulation controller following [10].
velocity of 0.3 m/s along the x direction. The decoupled
2) Workspace Reachability
baselines, RL + Arm-QP and PADP + Arm-QP, are excluded
We randomly sample 100 desired end-effector positions pdes
ee because they cannot sustain this long-range tracking task
within a ball of radius r m centered at the base-frame
ws without coordinated whole-body motion. On flat terrain, our
origin, with height constrained to z ∈ [0.3, 1.1] m. A trial
method achieves comparable translational tracking accuracy
is considered successful if the end-effector reaches the target
to Whole-Body MPC and the lowest orientation error. On the
within 10 s with a final position error (cid:107)p −pdes(cid:107) < 0.05 m.
ee ee 2 simulated uneven terrain, our method degrades much less than
Reachability is measured as the success rate over all trials.
the baselines, while Whole-Body MPC often loses balance
Fig. 5 shows that the proposed controller achieves the
after only a few steps and Whole-Body RL suffers from larger
highest workspace reachability over all tested radii. Since r
ws
tracking errors. These results indicate that PADP preserves the
is measured from the robot base frame, a smaller radius does
stability of the reused locomotion policy, while the unified
not necessarily indicate an easier target. Near-body targets
whole-body QP explicitly regulates end-effector motion and
may require the base to move away while the arm folds
whole-body dynamics at high frequency.
back to create sufficient manipulation space, which explains
4) Whole-Body Coordination
the lower success rate at r = 0.3, where many failed
ws
samples are located in the inner workspace close to the Another example of continuous end-effector tracking on the
robot body. Overall, the proposed controller maintains high simulated uneven terrain is shown in Fig. 7, with the corre-
reachability across different target regions, indicating that the sponding tracking data plotted in Fig. 6. The end-effector z
robot expands its manipulation workspace through coordinated position closely follows the sinusoidal reference throughout the
loco-manipulation rather than local arm motion alone, as illus- motion, while the base height is adjusted adaptively by the con-
trated in Fig. 4. The decoupled baselines, RL + Arm-QP and troller to support the tracking task, indicating that the motion
PADP + Arm-QP, degrade rapidly as r increases, because is achieved through coordinated whole-body assistance rather
ws
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 7 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
YAN et al.: FROM POLICY ACTIONS TO WHOLE-BODY DYNAMICS 7
Fig. 9. Hardware demonstrations of contact-rich loco-manipulation. (a)(b)
Elastic-band pulling with whole-body posture adaptation. (c) Wall wiping with
end-effector contact. (d) Contact writing. (e) Close-up of the end-effector trace
during contact writing.
than arm motion alone. Meanwhile, although the base forward
velocity exhibits noticeable fluctuations during locomotion, the
end-effector forward velocity remains comparatively smooth.
Fig. 10. Flat-ground hardware demonstrations of task-oriented loco-
This result suggests that the proposed controller compensates
manipulation and compliant interaction. (a)–(c) Object grasping and dropping.
locomotion-induced body motion through coordinated whole- (d)–(f) Door opening. (g)–(i) Compliant response under human interaction,
body control, thereby preserving stable end-effector tracking where the red arrow indicates the external perturbation direction.
on uneven ground. 1) Hybrid Force-Motion Manipulation
We first evaluate the capability of end-effector force con-
5) Robustness under Disturbance
trol, including elastic-band pulling, wall wiping, and contact
Fig. 8 shows the disturbance response while tracking a
writing. These tasks require either direct end-effector force
constant end-effector velocity of 0.3 m/s along the x direction.
regulation or hybrid force-motion control while maintaining
When a lateral force is applied to the base, the base shows
contact. In Fig. 9, the robot tracks an increasing backward
a noticeable displacement in the y direction, while the end-
pulling force by lowering the body, extending the arm, and
effector y position remains close to its reference, indicating
repositioning the base. The visible oscillations mainly come
that the controller absorbs the disturbance through whole-body
from small fluctuations of the torque-based contact estimator
motion without significantly degrading the end-effector task.
under the unmodeled elastic-band force, while the robot re-
When a lateral force is applied directly to the end-effector,
mains stable and completes the pulling task. During the wall-
a larger deviation appears in the end-effector y position, but
wiping and contact-writing tasks shown in Fig. 9, the end-
the error quickly decreases after the disturbance is removed.
effector maintains stable wall contact while moving tangen-
Meanwhile, the end-effector velocity along the commanded x
tially along the surface. These tasks require normal-direction
direction remains close to the desired value except for a short
force regulation together with motion tracking along the wall.
transient. These results demonstrate robust loco-manipulation
The robot successfully sustains stable contact during wiping
performance under external disturbances through coordinated
and traces an accurate trajectory during contact writing.
whole-body control.
2) Representative Loco-Manipulation Tasks
6) Computation Time
Two task-oriented examples are shown in Fig. 10(a)–(f),
Table III reports the measured controller computation time.
including object grasping and dropping, and door opening. In
The reported update rate refers to the high-level evaluation rate
both tasks, the operator specifies only the desired end-effector
used in simulation execution. For our method, policy inference
motion and orientation with a remote controller, while the
runs asynchronously, and the model-optimization time includes
body and leg motions are generated automatically to support
both PADP and the unified whole-body QP. The total model-
manipulation. In the object grasping task, the robot adjusts its
optimization time is 0.85±0.25 ms, which is below the 2 ms
body posture and base position to support grasping, transport,
period required by the 500 Hz whole-body control loop. In
and release. During door opening, the end-effector is guided
contrast, Whole-Body MPC requires 18.52 ms per optimization
to grab and rotate the handle, and the robot moves continu-
on the same CPU, exceeding the 12.5 ms period of an 80 Hz
ously with the commanded end-effector motion throughout the
real-time loop. Thus, its 80 Hz rate in Table III denotes a
interaction.
simulated-time evaluation rate.
3) Uneven-terrain Hardware Validation
To further clarify the uneven-terrain capability of the pro-
posed framework, we conduct two additional hardware ex-
B. Hardware Experiments
periments with the PADP-based loco-manipulation controller
The hardware experiments are conducted on a DEEP active, as shown in Fig. 11. The robot grasps a suspended
Robotics LYNX M20 quadruped (wheeled-foot, 33 kg) using object while traversing uneven grass terrain, and performs
an onboard Intel NUC with an Intel Core i7-1360P CPU. end-effector tracking while ascending and descending a step.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

=== PAGE 8 ===
This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/LRA.2026.3734869
8 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS. PREPRINT VERSION. ACCEPTED SEPTEMBER, 2026
[5] T. Portela, A. Cramariuc, M. Mittal, and M. Hutter, “Whole-body end-
effector pose tracking,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11205–11211, IEEE, 2025.
[6] D. Hou, C. Zhu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, C. Guo, and Y. Liu, “Efficient learning
of a unified policy for whole-body manipulation and locomotion skills,”
in 2025 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pp. 5455–5461, IEEE, 2025.
[7] P. Zhi, P. Li, J. Yin, B. Jia, and S. Huang, “Learning a unified policy for
position and force control in legged loco-manipulation,” in 9th Annual
Conference on Robot Learning, 2025.
Fig. 11. Uneven-terrain hardware validation with the PADP-based loco-
[8] B. Xu, H. Weng, Q. Lu, Y. Gao, and H. Xu, “FACET: Force-adaptive
manipulation controller active. (a)–(c) Object grasping while traversing uneven
control via impedance reference tracking for legged robots,” in 9th
grass terrain. (d)–(f) End-effector tracking during step traversal under non-flat
Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2025.
contact conditions.
[9] G. Pan, Q. Ben, Z. Yuan, G. Jiang, Y. Ji, S. Li, J. Pang, H. Liu, and
These experiments provide hardware evidence of PADP-based H. Xu, “Roboduet: Learning a cooperative policy for whole-body legged
loco-manipulation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
loco-manipulation on moderately uneven terrain. However, the
[10] Z. Wang, Y. Jia, L. Shi, H. Wang, H. Zhao, X. Li, J. Zhou, J. Ma, and
current validation does not cover highly irregular, loose, or
G. Zhou, “Arm-constrained curriculum learning for loco-manipulation of
deformable terrain. Since PADP relies on estimated contact a wheel-legged robot,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 10770–10776, 2024.
states and nominal wheel-ground contact kinematics, large
[11] J. Cheng, D. Kang, G. Fadini, G. Shi, and S. Coros, “Rambo: Rl-
contact-point errors and rapid contact changes may degrade
augmented model-based whole-body control for loco-manipulation,”
controller performance under such conditions. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
[12] Y. Chen and Q. Nguyen, “Learning agile locomotion and adaptive be-
4) Compliant Human Interaction
haviors via rl-augmented mpc,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference
Fig. 10(g)–(i) illustrates compliant human interaction. With on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 11436–11442, IEEE, 2024.
[13] C. Yan, Y. Jiang, Q. Liu, J. Qin, Q. Ma, and Y. Wang, “Constraint-aware
reduced end-effector tracking gains and bounded tracking
adaptation: Bridging model-based control with reinforcement learning
errors, the end-effector can be manually pulled and reposi- for quadruped versatility,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
tioned without generating strong resistance. When an external 2025.
[14] H. Wang, R. Zhou, L. Ding, T. Liu, Z. Zhang, P. Xu, H. Gao, and
perturbation is applied, the controller produces coordinated
Z. Deng, “Whole-body constrained learning for legged locomotion via
body and arm adaptation, including body lowering and arm hierarchical optimization,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
extension, while maintaining stable support. [15] B. Muraccioli, A. Cariou, P.-A. Leziart, M. Celerier, A. Demont, G. Ven-
ture, and M. Benallegue, “Safe execution of RL policies via acceleration-
based CBF-QP constraint enforcement for real-world robotic deploy-
ments,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
VI. CONCLUSION
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2026. Accepted for publication.
[16] L. Molnar, J. Cheng, G. Fadini, D. Kang, F. Zargarbashi, and S. Coros,
This work presented a unified loco-manipulation framework
“Whole-body inverse dynamics mpc for legged loco-manipulation,”
that bridges generic learning-based locomotion and model-
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
based whole-body control through Policy Action Dynamics [17] M. Bjelonic, C. D. Bellicoso, Y. de Viragh, D. Sako, F. D. Tresoldi,
F. Jenelten, and M. Hutter, “Keep rollin’—whole-body motion control
Projection (PADP). By projecting joint-space policy outputs
and planning for wheeled quadrupedal robots,” IEEE Robotics and
into contact-consistent whole-body variables and using them
Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 2116–2123, 2019.
as a locomotion prior, the proposed method enables position, [18] C. Yan, J. Qin, Q. Liu, and Q. Ma, “Slip detection and recovery for
quadruped robots via orthogonal decomposition,” IEEE Transactions on
force, and hybrid force-motion manipulation without retrain-
Industrial Electronics, vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 6166–6174, 2025.
ing the locomotion policy. Simulation and hardware experi-
[19] G. Bledt, P. M. Wensing, S. Ingersoll, and S. Kim, “Contact model
ments on point-foot and wheeled-foot quadruped manipulators fusion for event-based locomotion in unstructured terrains,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
demonstrated stable and accurate loco-manipulation across
pp. 4399–4406, IEEE, 2018.
free-space tracking, contact-rich interaction, task-oriented op-
[20] G. Bledt, M. J. Powell, B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, P. M. Wensing, and S. Kim,
eration, compliant human interaction, and uneven-terrain sce- “Mit cheetah 3: Design and control of a robust, dynamic quadruped
robot,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
narios. These results suggest a practical route for reusing
and Systems (IROS), pp. 2245–2252, IEEE, 2018.
existing joint-space locomotion policies in dynamic whole-
[21] J. Long, Z. Wang, Q. Li, J. Gao, L. Cao, and J. Pang, “Hybrid internal
body loco-manipulation. model:Learningagileleggedlocomotionwithsimulatedrobotresponse,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11460, 2023.
[22] J. Carpentier, G. Saurel, G. Buondonno, J. Mirabel, F. Lamiraux,
O. Stasse, and N. Mansard, “The pinocchio c++ library – a fast and
REFERENCES
flexible implementation of rigid body dynamics algorithms and their
analytical derivatives,” in IEEE International Symposium on System
[1] J.-P. Sleiman, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “Versatile multicontact
Integrations (SII), 2019.
planning and control for legged loco-manipulation,” Science Robotics,
[23] H. J. Ferreau, C. Kirches, A. Potschka, H. G. Bock, and M. Diehl,
vol. 8, no. 81, p. eadg5014, 2023.
“qpoases: A parametric active-set algorithm for quadratic programming,”
[2] G. B. Margolis, G. Yang, K. Paigwar, T. Chen, and P. Agrawal, “Rapid
Mathematical Programming Computation, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 327–363,
locomotion via reinforcement learning,” The International Journal of
2014.
Robotics Research, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 572–587, 2024.
[3] J.-R. Chiu, J.-P. Sleiman, M. Mittal, F. Farshidian, and M. Hutter, “A
collision-free mpc for whole-body dynamic locomotion and manipu-
lation,” in 2022 international conference on robotics and automation
(ICRA), pp. 4686–4693, IEEE, 2022.
[4] X. Liu, B. Ma, C. Qi, Y. Ding, N. Xu, G. Zhang, P. Chen, K. Liu,
Z. Jia, C. Guan, et al., “Mlm: Learning multi-task loco-manipulation
whole-body control for quadruped robot with arm,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 81–88, 2025.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on September 21,2026 at 08:08:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
© 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.